FIREBASE_INTEGRATION_COMPLETE.md, before:

# Firebase Integration Complete

## Overview

Successfully integrated Firebase notifications in your Flutter task manager app and migrated to use the existing ApiClient instead of a custom API service.

## ✅ What's Been Implemented

### 1. Firebase Setup

- **Dependencies**: Added `firebase_core` and `firebase_messaging` to `pubspec.yaml`
- **Platform Configuration**:
  - Android: Updated `AndroidManifest.xml`, added `google-services.json`
  - iOS: Updated `Info.plist`, added `GoogleService-Info.plist`

### 2. Core Services

- **FirebaseService** (`lib/core/services/firebase_service.dart`):

  - Firebase initialization and token management
  - Foreground and background message handling
  - Token registration with backend using existing ApiClient
  - Token deactivation with custom DELETE-with-body implementation
  - Permission handling for iOS
  - Message navigation handling

- **NotificationService** (`lib/core/services/notification_service.dart`):
  - In-app notification display
  - Toast-style notifications with customizable styling

### 3. State Management

- **FirebaseProvider** (`lib/presentation/providers/firebase_provider.dart`):
  - Provider-based state management for Firebase functionality
  - Loading states and error handling
  - Token registration/deactivation with backend

### 4. Testing Interface

- **FirebaseTestScreen** (`lib/presentation/screens/dev/firebase_test_screen.dart`):
  - Comprehensive dev/testing interface
  - Token management controls
  - Real-time status display

### 5. API Integration

- **Removed Custom API Service**: Deleted `lib/core/services/api_service.dart`
- **Updated to Use Existing ApiClient**: All backend calls now use `lib/core/api/api_client.dart`
- **Custom DELETE with Body**: Implemented custom method for token deactivation since standard DELETE doesn't support request body

## 🔧 Backend Integration

### Endpoints

Your backend should implement these endpoints:

```
POST /firebase/tokens
- Body: { "token": "fcm_token", "device_type": "android|ios", "device_id": "device_id" }
- Headers: Authorization: Bearer {auth_token}

DELETE /firebase/tokens
- Body: { "token": "fcm_token" }
- Headers: Authorization: Bearer {auth_token}
```

### API Configuration

- Base URL: `https://tms.amusoft.uz/api` (from `ApiConstants.baseUrl`)
- Uses existing authentication system with Bearer tokens

## 🚀 How to Use

### 1. Initialize Firebase

```dart
final firebaseProvider = Provider.of<FirebaseProvider>(context);
await firebaseProvider.initialize();
```

### 2. Register Token with Backend

```dart
await firebaseProvider.registerToken(
  authToken: 'your_auth_token',
);
```

### 3. Deactivate Token from Backend

```dart
await firebaseProvider.deactivateToken(
  authToken: 'your_auth_token',
);
```

### 4. Listen to Token Changes

```dart
String? token = firebaseProvider.fcmToken;
bool isRegistered = firebaseProvider.isRegisteredWithBackend;
```

## 📱 Testing

### Using the Test Screen

1. Navigate to `FirebaseTestScreen` (dev screen)
2. Enter auth token
3. Test initialization, registration, and deactivation
4. Monitor logs and status updates

### Key Features

- Real-time FCM token display
- Backend registration status
- Error handling and display
- Loading states
- Comprehensive logging

## 🔍 Key Implementation Details

### Custom DELETE with Body

Since the standard HTTP DELETE method typically doesn't support request bodies, we implemented a custom solution:

```dart
Future<bool> _deleteTokenWithBody(
  ApiClient apiClient,
  String endpoint,
  Map<String, dynamic> body,
) async {
  final uri = Uri.parse('${ApiConstants.baseUrl}$endpoint');
  final request = http.Request('DELETE', uri);
  request.headers['Content-Type'] = 'application/json';
  if (_storedAuthToken != null) {
    request.headers['Authorization'] = 'Bearer $_storedAuthToken';
  }
  request.body = jsonEncode(body);

  final response = await request.send();
  return response.statusCode >= 200 && response.statusCode < 300;
}
```

### Message Handling

- **Foreground**: Shows in-app notifications
- **Background**: Handled by Firebase's background handler
- **Navigation**: Configurable based on message data

### Device Information

Simple device identification without requiring additional packages:

```dart
String _getSimpleDeviceId() {
  if (Platform.isAndroid) {
    return 'android_${DateTime.now().millisecondsSinceEpoch % 100000}';
  } else if (Platform.isIOS) {
    return 'ios_${DateTime.now().millisecondsSinceEpoch % 100000}';
  }
  return 'unknown_${DateTime.now().millisecondsSinceEpoch % 100000}';
}
```

## 🎯 Next Steps

1. **Add Provider to App**: Include `FirebaseProvider` in your app's provider tree
2. **Test Backend Integration**: Verify your backend endpoints work with the implemented client
3. **Integrate with Auth Flow**: Connect Firebase token registration with your login/logout flow
4. **Customize Notifications**: Update notification display and navigation based on your app's needs
5. **Production Testing**: Test on physical devices with actual push notifications

## 📝 Files Modified/Created

### Created:

- `lib/core/services/firebase_service.dart`
- `lib/core/services/notification_service.dart`
- `lib/presentation/providers/firebase_provider.dart`
- `lib/presentation/screens/dev/firebase_test_screen.dart`

### Modified:

- `pubspec.yaml` (added Firebase dependencies)
- `android/app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml`
- `ios/Runner/Info.plist`

### Removed:

- `lib/core/services/api_service.dart` (replaced with existing ApiClient)

The Firebase integration is now complete and uses your existing API infrastructure for consistency!

Commit message:

feat: Add PATCH request support to ApiClient for updating resources
feat: Enhance FirebaseService to update FCM token locale on language change

feat: Implement notification template parsing and navigation in NotificationService

feat: Integrate FCM token locale update in language selector and settings widgets

fix: Ensure proper context usage in language selector and settings for FCM updates

chore: Update main.dart to use AppRootController for better state management

chore: Add firebase_analytics dependency and update pubspec.lock

docs: Create FCM_NOTIFICATION_PAYLOADS.md to define notification payload structure

feat: Introduce notification template definitions and parsing utilities

FIREBASE_INTEGRATION_COMPLETE.md, after:

# Firebase Integration Complete

## Overview

Successfully integrated Firebase notifications in your Flutter task manager app and migrated to use the existing ApiClient instead of a custom API service.

## ✅ What's Been Implemented

### 1. Firebase Setup

- **Dependencies**: Added `firebase_core` and `firebase_messaging` to `pubspec.yaml`
- **Platform Configuration**:
  - Android: Updated `AndroidManifest.xml`, added `google-services.json`
  - iOS: Updated `Info.plist`, added `GoogleService-Info.plist`

### 2. Core Services

- **FirebaseService** (`lib/core/services/firebase_service.dart`):

  - Firebase initialization and token management
  - Foreground and background message handling
  - Token registration with backend using existing ApiClient
  - Token deactivation with custom DELETE-with-body implementation
  - Permission handling for iOS
  - Message navigation handling

- **NotificationService** (`lib/core/services/notification_service.dart`):
  - In-app notification display
  - Toast-style notifications with customizable styling

### 3. State Management

- **FirebaseProvider** (`lib/presentation/providers/firebase_provider.dart`):
  - Provider-based state management for Firebase functionality
  - Loading states and error handling
  - Token registration/deactivation with backend

### 4. Testing Interface

- **FirebaseTestScreen** (`lib/presentation/screens/dev/firebase_test_screen.dart`):
  - Comprehensive dev/testing interface
  - Token management controls
  - Real-time status display

### 5. API Integration

- **Removed Custom API Service**: Deleted `lib/core/services/api_service.dart`
- **Updated to Use Existing ApiClient**: All backend calls now use `lib/core/api/api_client.dart`
- **Custom DELETE with Body**: Implemented custom method for token deactivation since standard DELETE doesn't support request body

## 🔧 Backend Integration

### Endpoints

Your backend should implement these endpoints:

```
POST /firebase/tokens
- Body: { "token": "fcm_token", "device_type": "android|ios", "device_id": "device_id" }
- Headers: Authorization: Bearer {auth_token}

DELETE /firebase/tokens
- Body: { "token": "fcm_token" }
- Headers: Authorization: Bearer {auth_token}

DELETE /firebase/tokens/public
- Body: { "token": "fcm_token" }
- No Authorization header required (public)
```

### API Configuration

- Base URL: `https://tms.amusoft.uz/api` (from `ApiConstants.baseUrl`)
- Uses existing authentication system with Bearer tokens

Note: The app will first attempt `DELETE /firebase/tokens` with auth; if the server returns 401, it will automatically retry with `DELETE /firebase/tokens/public` without auth.

## 🚀 How to Use

### 1. Initialize Firebase

```dart
final firebaseProvider = Provider.of<FirebaseProvider>(context);
await firebaseProvider.initialize();
```

### 2. Register Token with Backend

```dart
await firebaseProvider.registerToken(
  authToken: 'your_auth_token',
);
```

### 3. Deactivate Token from Backend

```dart
await firebaseProvider.deactivateToken(
  authToken: 'your_auth_token',
);
```

### 4. Listen to Token Changes

```dart
String? token = firebaseProvider.fcmToken;
bool isRegistered = firebaseProvider.isRegisteredWithBackend;
```

## 📱 Testing

### Using the Test Screen

1. Navigate to `FirebaseTestScreen` (dev screen)
2. Enter auth token
3. Test initialization, registration, and deactivation
4. Monitor logs and status updates

### Key Features

- Real-time FCM token display
- Backend registration status
- Error handling and display
- Loading states
- Comprehensive logging

## 🔍 Key Implementation Details

### Custom DELETE with Body

Since the standard HTTP DELETE method typically doesn't support request bodies, we implemented a custom solution:

```dart
Future<bool> _deleteTokenWithBody(
  ApiClient apiClient,
  String endpoint,
  Map<String, dynamic> body,
) async {
  final uri = Uri.parse('${ApiConstants.baseUrl}$endpoint');
  final request = http.Request('DELETE', uri);
  request.headers['Content-Type'] = 'application/json';
  if (_storedAuthToken != null) {
    request.headers['Authorization'] = 'Bearer $_storedAuthToken';
  }
  request.body = jsonEncode(body);

  final response = await request.send();
  return response.statusCode >= 200 && response.statusCode < 300;
}
```

### Message Handling

- **Foreground**: Shows in-app notifications
- **Background**: Handled by Firebase's background handler
- **Navigation**: Configurable based on message data

### Device Information

Simple device identification without requiring additional packages:

```dart
String _getSimpleDeviceId() {
  if (Platform.isAndroid) {
    return 'android_${DateTime.now().millisecondsSinceEpoch % 100000}';
  } else if (Platform.isIOS) {
    return 'ios_${DateTime.now().millisecondsSinceEpoch % 100000}';
  }
  return 'unknown_${DateTime.now().millisecondsSinceEpoch % 100000}';
}
```

## 🎯 Next Steps

1. **Add Provider to App**: Include `FirebaseProvider` in your app's provider tree
2. **Test Backend Integration**: Verify your backend endpoints work with the implemented client
3. **Integrate with Auth Flow**: Connect Firebase token registration with your login/logout flow
4. **Customize Notifications**: Update notification display and navigation based on your app's needs
5. **Production Testing**: Test on physical devices with actual push notifications

## 📝 Files Modified/Created

### Created:

- `lib/core/services/firebase_service.dart`
- `lib/core/services/notification_service.dart`
- `lib/presentation/providers/firebase_provider.dart`
- `lib/presentation/screens/dev/firebase_test_screen.dart`

### Modified:

- `pubspec.yaml` (added Firebase dependencies)
- `android/app/src/main/AndroidManifest.xml`
- `ios/Runner/Info.plist`

### Removed:

- `lib/core/services/api_service.dart` (replaced with existing ApiClient)

The Firebase integration is now complete and uses your existing API infrastructure for consistency!
